Feature/r devtools (#374)
hpcleuven/VscDocumentation: source/software/r_devtools.rst

.. _r_devtools:

R installing packages with devtools
===================================

Introduction
~~~~~~~~~~~~

The installation of some R packages may require the use of devtools.
Devtools is an R package that facilitates the installation of other
R packages from github, gitlab, bitbucket or other repositories.
In what follows github will be used as an example, please consult the
devtools_ documentation for examples of other repositories.

Depending on how your R library is managed, you will need a slightly different
approach to use or install devtools.

> A Standard R library
> ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
> 
> When you are using a standard R library that you use alongside an 
> R module or with RStudio Server, you can use the devtools that is
> included in the module. The following steps assume that you already
> have a standard R library located in your ``$VSC_DATA/R`` directory. 
> If you have not yet set up your R library, first set up your :ref:`R library<r_package_management>`.
> 
> Using the module devtools to install R packages
> -----------------------------------------------
> 
> From an interactive session on a Genius or wICE compute node you can load
> your prefered R module and launch R.
> 
> 
> 
> ::
> 
>    $ module load R/4.1.0-foss-2021a
>    $ R
> 
> By default, the R library path will point to the module R library.
> If this is the case, first set the R library to your personal R library path.
> 
> 
> 
> ::
> 
>    > # check that the [1] R library path points to your personal R library
>    > .libPaths()
>    > # set the R library path if this was not the case.
>    > .libPaths("/data/leuven/XXX/vscXXXXX/R/")
> 
> Load devtools and install your package from github.
> 
> 
> 
> ::
> 
>    > library(devtools)
>    > devtools::install_github("Developer/Package")

Reviewer: Here is a suggestion to condense this a little bit and to use more standard terminology:

```suggestion
Installing in a local R library
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
If you are using an R installation that comes from a centrally installed R module
or an RStudio Server app, then you can use the devtools package that is included
in that R installation. Assuming that you want to install your additional R packages
in a ``$VSC_DATA/R`` directory, you will need to execute the following commands
in the R console:

::
   > # First check that the R library path points to your personal R library:
   > .libPaths()
   > # Set the R library path if this was is the case.
   > .libPaths("/data/leuven/XXX/vscXXXXX/R/")
   > # Load devtools and e.g. install your package from github:
   > library(devtools)
   > devtools::install_github("Developer/Package")
```

> A Conda R environment 
> ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
> 
> If you are using conda to manage your R packages, you should first install
> devtools in your conda environment. The following steps assume that you 
> already have a conda R environment named "science". If you do not yet have
> a conda R environment, First create a :ref:`conda environment<Python packages>`.
> 
> Using the conda devtools to install R packages
> ----------------------------------------------
> 
> From an interactive session on a Genius or wICE compute node, activate your 
> R environment and install devtools
> 
> 
> 
> ::
> 
>    $ source activate science
>    $ conda install -c conda-forge r-devtools
> 
> Launch R and make sure that the R library 
> path points to your conda library.
> 
> 
> 
> ::
> 
>    $ R
> 
> 
> 
> ::
> 
>    > # check that the [1] R library path points to your conda R library
>    > .libPaths()
>    > # set the R library path if this was not the case.
>    > .libPaths("/data/leuven/XXX/vscXXXXX/miniconda3/envs/science/lib/R/library")
> 
> Load devtools and install your package from github.
> 
> 
> 
> ::
> 
>    > library(devtools)
>    > devtools::install_github("Developer/Package")

Reviewer: Also here a suggestion to condense this a bit.
And instead of the ":ref:`conda environment<Python packages>`." link, it might be better if you could link to the "Installing R packages using conda" paragraph of the "R package management" page instead.

```suggestion
Installing in a conda environment
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
If you are using conda to manage your R packages, you should first install
devtools in your conda environment. The following steps assume that you 
already have a conda environment named "science". If you do not yet have
a conda environment, First create a :ref:`conda environment<Python packages>`. 

::
   $ # Activate your conda environment and install devtools
   $ source activate science
   $ conda install -c conda-forge r-devtools
   $ # Launch R
   $ R
   > # Check that the R library path points to your conda R library
   > .libPaths()
   > # Set the R library path if this was not the case.
   > .libPaths("/data/leuven/XXX/vscXXXXX/miniconda3/envs/science/lib/R/library")
   > # Load devtools and e.g. install your package from github:
   > library(devtools)
   > devtools::install_github("Developer/Package")
```

> .. _devtools: https://www.rdocumentation.org/packages/devtools/versions/2.4.5

Reviewer: It would be better to just link to this page:
```suggestion
.. _devtools: https://www.rdocumentation.org/packages/devtools
```
which will then redirect to the latest version (currently 2.4.5)

.. _r_devtools:

R installing packages with devtools
===================================

Introduction
~~~~~~~~~~~~

> The installation of some R packages may require the use of devtools.

Reviewer 2: It would help readability due to the change in formatting.
But, OK if you don't want to do it.

Devtools is an R package that facilitates the installation of other
R packages from github, gitlab, bitbucket or other repositories.
In what follows github will be used as an example, please consult the
devtools_ documentation for examples of other repositories.

Depending on how your R library is managed, you will need a slightly different
approach to use or install devtools.

.. note::

  When consulting the devtools documentation, make sure that it is the correct version!

>   It should match the module devtools version. To check what devtools version is installed:

Reviewer: suggestion (grammar):
```suggestion
  It should match the module's devtools version. To check which devtools version is installed:
```

>   It should match the module's devtools version. To check which devtools version is installed:

Author: I reworded it a bit because the original wording caused some confusion:
"It should match the devtools version included in the R module."

  .. code-block:: r
    
    library(devtools)
    sessioninfo::session_info()

Installing in a local R library
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

If you manage your R packages in a :ref:`local R library<r_package_management_standard_lib>` under ``$VSC_DATA/R``
while using a centrally installed R module, you can use the devtools package included in the module.
You will need to execute the following commands in the R console:

.. code-block:: r

>    > # First check that the R library path points to your personal R library:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   > # First check that the R library path points to your local R library:
```
(just for more consistent naming)

   > .libPaths()

>    > # Set the R library path if this was is the case.

Reviewer 2: if this is *not* the case (?)

   > .libPaths("/data/leuven/XXX/vscXXXXX/R/")
   > # Load devtools and e.g. install your package from github:
   > library(devtools)
   > devtools::install_github("Developer/Package")

.. note::

>   The devtools package is **not** included in "-bare" R modules. *e.g.* R/4.0.2-foss-2018a-bare

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  The devtools package is **not** included in "-bare" R modules, *e.g.* R/4.0.2-foss-2018a-bare.
```
(punctuation)

>   The devtools package is **not** included in "-bare" R modules, *e.g.* R/4.0.2-foss-2018a-bare.

Reviewer 2: the "e.g." has to come out of italics (because there is nothing special about this word here in this context).

Installing in a conda environment
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

If you are using conda to manage your R packages, you should first install
devtools in your conda environment. The following steps assume that you 
already have a conda environment named "science". If you do not yet have
a conda environment, First create a :ref:`conda environment<r_package_management_conda>`. 

.. code-block:: bash

   $ # Activate your conda environment and install devtools
   $ source activate science
   $ conda install -c conda-forge r-devtools
   $ # Launch R
   $ R

> 

Reviewer 2: Please add a line like this:

"In the following example, it is assumed that your miniconda environment is installed in `$VSC_DATA/miniconda3`."
